# Introduction {.page_break_before}

One of the primary subjects in any undergraduate major in life sciences is histology.
The students must identify cell types across various tissues and look for color and shape patterns in hematoxylin-eosin stains.
Textbooks, like Junqueira's Basic Histology [@wikidata:Q102104590] work as manuals that perpetuate the paradigms (in the Kuhnian sense) [@wikidata:Q951060] of what we know about a few hundred cell types.

Our concept of "cell type" is still based on centuries-old histochemical techniques, such as the Golgi-stains of neurons immortalized by Ramon y Cajal [@wikidata:Q51488921].
The histological influence is noticeable even in the names given to cell types, such as "erythrocytes," "eosinophils," "basophils," and "oxyphilic cells of the thyroid."
The concepts we use are drawn from studies of microanatomy.
This connection with anatomy leads us to think about cell types as anatomical entities as dissectible and fixed in an organism.
The limits of resolution perpetuated by the histological-anatomical view may be why attempts to quantify cell types use the scale of "hundreds" of human cell types [@doi:10.7554/elife.27041; @doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1629-x].

New techniques have challenged this anatomy-based conceptualization. 
From flow cytometry to patch clamping to single-cell RNA-seq, we saw a burst of new categories, and novel cell "subtypes" and "families" popped up in the literature. 
The bursting intensified in the past few years, with the rise of projects to characterize _all_ human cell types, like the Human Cell Atlas and HUBMAP [@doi:10.7554/eLife.27041; @doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1629-x].


The advances in biology require us to find better answers for how to define a cell type.
Such a concept might not even have a "true" meaning in a philosophical-realistic sense. 
Nevertheless, we can strive to find nominal, pragmatic definitions for the real challenges of large-scale biology. 
Otherwise, how can we precisely label single-cell data?
How can we formalize the discovery of new cell types?
How can we integrate the knowledge from millions of published scientific articles?

The need for a conceptual advance is being perceived by the community, and new perspectives are rising [@wikidata:Q87649649; @doi:10.1242/dev.169854; @doi:10.1242/dev.178996; @wikidata:Q47565008; @wikidata:Q99418657; @wikidata:Q98665291; @wikidata:Q93086971; @wikidata:Q26770736; @wikidata:Q35688096; @wikidata:Q98633613; @wikidata:Q99418649; @wikidata:Q40436539].
In an opinion article published in Cell Systems in 2017, a series of researchers presented their views on the conceptual definition of 'cell type' in the context of a mature organism [@wikidata:Q87649649].
Many scientists believed that cell functions have a core role in defining cell types, which is a slippery road, as the very meaning of "function" in biology is elusive [@doi:10.7554/eLife.47014].
The opinions were varied, and no consensus was achieved.

There is not even a consensus on nomenclature, thus, we made a judgment call to use the term "cell type" to emphasize the focus on types as classes (or "kinds") in contrast to real-world objects.
The similar term "cell state" is used both to describe classes (e.g., activated T-cell) and real-world observations (e.g., the current state of a particular cell).
Other similar notions, such as a "cell set," "cell population," and "cell cluster," can also reminisce of a specific, countable group of cells, frequently from the same experiment. 

The term "cell class" is also used in the literature and is a suitable synonym for our notion of cell type, as the primary goal here is to refine the human-based theoretical classes.
Classes that we can instantiate, i.e., assign to an observation of any real cell, similar to how we assign the class _Homo sapiens_ to every human.
The term "cell identity" has also been suggested for avoiding the cell type/cell state dilemma [@wikidata:Q64974172], but the notion of identity is slightly different from the idea of class.
We opted to frame our work around the term "cell type" due to its historical usage and familiarity for the life sciences community.


One core line of thought to define "cell type" is based on the cell type as an evolutionary unit defined by a Core Regulatory Complex (CoRC) of transcription factors.
That definition enables the drawing of parallels, from the evolution of other biological entities (such as genes, proteins, and species) to cell types' evolution.
Models of how multicellular life works greatly benefit from concepts such as "sister types" (cell types that diverged from a single ancestor), "cell type homology" (cell types in different species that share a common evolutionary origin), and "cell type convergence" (cell types that execute similar functions but which are not directly evolutionarily related) [@pmid:18927580; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.127] 

Another direction is based on the notion of attractors: regions of dynamical stability in a feature space, which might have different qualities. [@wikidata:Q37475461; @wikidata:Q91908361]
In this theory, "basins of attraction" direct cell phenotypes, providing points in, say, a gene expression space towards which different cells "move" their expression programs. [@wikidata:]
This dynamic view see each cell type corresponding to "a self-stabilizing regulatory program, which acts to maintain and restore the cell type-specific program of gene expression." [@Q90361677]

As much as different concepts of species coexist [@doi:10.1080/10635150701701083], our quest to define cell types may take various forms.
The challenge of representing cell types in the context of evolution is conceptually different from representing cell types in biomedical experimentation.
In that second direction, the groundwork of the Cell Ontology [@wikidata:Q21184168; @doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-6; @doi:10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7] and   CELDA [@wikidata:Q21284308]  and the contributions of the International Workshop on Cells in Experimental Life Sciences series [@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1976-2; @doi:10.1186/s12859-019-2721-9] are notable.
Their contributions base much of the views here and will be discussed in detail throughout the article.


More explicitily, we target the question: which cell type definition allows crafting coherent biological statements? 
The goal is to not say what cell types _are_, but what they can be for a consistent view of the world.
We also assume that biological statements that derive from experimentation should be logically valid, and thus aim to distill ways to resolve ambiguities in natural language statements makes knowledge unresolvable (i.e. neither true nor false). 
Concretely, it can be read with the development of science machines [@wikidata:Q27937312] in mind, as a way to define cell types that would be usable by semantically-aware artificial intelligence systems. 

Towards that goal, the body of the article is divided into four parts.
In Part 1, we propose a set of rules that are necessary and sufficient for defining cell types.
Part 2 offers a small set of names for differentiating the main classes of cell types.
In Part 3, we address the logical consequences of the proposed definitions, while Part 4 discusses the practical challenges envisaged in employing such definitions.