# Naming classes of cell types


Before we proceed to analyse the consequences of the criteria raised on part 1, it is importante to make a set of naming conventions for different classes of cell types. This is required, as much of the literature consider cell types in the context of one species (e.g. when dealing with a cell type as an evolutionary unit) as well as in the context of multispecies (such as in the case of cell ontology).


Current advances in the taxonomy of living beings are calling artificial the classifications of "genus", "families", "order", and similar rankings. While the level of a "species" is somewhat better defined (with discernible theoretical positions, at least), the other categories comprehen only classes of different levels of coverage. In accordance with the theoretical views of the PhyloCode, I consider only the level of "species" on the naming of classes of cell types. The three classes I propose, are: 

- Archetypes, for which the scope of the definition is beyond the level of species. For example, "mammal neutrophils". 
- \textit{Stricto sensu} cell types (or {bona fide} cell types), for which the scope of the definition is exactly one species. For example, "human neutrophils"
- Infratypes, cell types for which the scope is below the level of species. For example, considering the mouse strain "C57BL/6J", "C57BL/6J neutrophils".

These are common uses of "cell type" which are, nevertheless, mixed in practiced. By adopting a more precise vocabulary we can flesh out misunderstadings and communicate clearly. At the level of individual scientific experiments we usually work at the "infratype": the samples come only from a subpopulation of the  species of interest, and cannot be assumed to be "randomly sampled" from all individuals. This has important practical considerations for, once more, avoiding failing implicitly for the problem of induction. 


Moreover, in individual experiments, we not only work with infratypes, we work with very specific infratypes, guided by non-random research setups and pragmatic choices. For example, we might call "CD4 T cells" what are actually CD3+, CD4+, CD8+ CELLS from the axilary lymphnode of 2 month old female C57BL6/J mice from the mouse-house of the Institute of Biochemistry of the University of São Paulo collected in the morning around 10 pm for chow-fed ad libitum mice. Albeit really specific, all the mentioned facets (markers, anatomical location, age, biological sex, strain, housing conditions, circadian clock and diet) are known to alter the behaviour of cell types. Thus, it is necessary one more name, flor clarity: 

- Technotype: A specific, experimentally defined cell type, which harbours on its definitions the exact conditions from which the cell types were sampled. 

Note: a technotype is still a class. Unless a studied used only one single-cell, it likely contained some sampling method, which is the class for which hypothesis are actually tested, for example. This is the most "granular' cell type in our pragmatic view for research synthesis. This is the type that can be strictly annotated in single-cell RNA-seq analysis, for example. 

Single claims are made and tested for technotypes, and this claims can be logically combined in "upper" ontological levels for making claims with a higher degree of universality. This propagation of knowledge to upper levels, however, should not be implicit. (See Yarkoni2020 for an analogous problem in the psychological sciences). Knowledge should travel "quasi-inductionally" by forstering hypothesis with higher degrees of generality, which can then be tested for the expanded class. 