# 3. Logical consequences of the definition of a cell type

One logical consequence of the rules is that concepts of "subtype" become redundant with "cell type." A "subtype," then, is a concept that only makes sense when talking about classes with different degrees of universality. Thus, claims to discover new cell "subtypes" or "types" differ only stylistically and can be considered indistinguishable in the perspective of research synthesis. 

<<<<<<< HEAD
One notable logical consequence of the proposed set of criteria is that the definition of a cell state is left as a subclass for cell type.
For the pragmatic purpose adopted here, we avoid the dissection of the differences between persistent classes of cells (which we refer to as traditional cell types) or the transient, fugacious classes of cells (which we refer to as traditional cell states).
Even though such a distinction is an important topic for theoretical research, it is not a requirement for representing biomedical experiments.
=======
The cell type as defined here, includes both persistent  classes of cells - the traditional cell types - and transient, fugacious classes of cells - often also called states or even programs. Even though such distinctions are important topic for theoretical research, it might not a requirement for representing biomedical experiments. In fact, the fuzzy border  of activity ("traditional cell state") and identity ("traditional cell types") gene expression programs is acknowledged by the community [@doi:10.7554/eLife.43803]  [@wikidata:Q27311570]  . Aviv Regev, a co-chair of the Human Cell Atlas mentioned in a recent  HCA Latin America Meeting, "in a sense, for any cell, at any moment in time, when you are profiling it, what you are seeing is its state. (...) There is the overall state of the cell, which is made of many different programs, some of which represent this more invariant part of the cell's identity that we tend to call a type, whereas others are more variable and they can change for a cell of the same type" (https://youtu.be/1hOwgTH6vZY?list=PLkef4SGmngdbGgJIQh7xDI-lgMZMsl-YJ&t=1089). The rules proposed here aim at harmonizing these ideas, by explicitly allowing cell type definitions to include descriptors related to activity, identity, or a mix of both. 
>>>>>>> master

One example of this entailment is that the class “human cells in metaphase of mitosis” can be considered a cell type, as it can be explicitly defined and restricted to a taxon. 
Even though “metaphase” itself is a biological process, we can describe all cells executing this process as a singular cell class.

<<<<<<< HEAD
However, does a dividing fibroblast stop being a fibroblast, even if temporarily?
Again, we do not aim to answer this in a philosophical-ontological sense. 
Pragmatically, if the explicit definition used for fibroblast (e.g., expression of a marker) still holds during duplication, this cell can be assigned to two classes that are not hierarchically related: “fibroblasts” and “doubling cells”.
If cells can be assigned to multiple classes that are not hierarchically related, it is not possible to annotate cell types with a single identifier using a taxonomic tree, in which each concept is represented by a single node with one (and only one) direct parent node. 
This is in conflict with attempts to classify cell-types using single hierarchies in the form of a tree [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz543] [@doi:10.7554/eLife.38619] [@doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100616-060818].  
Cell types need to be represented ontologically with multiple inheritance, which can be thought of as multiple, intertwining trees that take into account different ways of classifying cells (Figure @fig:notatree).

![The cell type hierarchy is not a tree - it requires multiple inheritance for completeness.
](images/notatree_hn.jpg){#fig:notatree}

Another logical consequence of the definition is that the concept of subtype becomes redundant with the concept of cell type.
The notion of subtype, then, only makes sense when discussing classes with different degrees of universality.
Thus, claims to discovery of new cell “subtypes” or “types” differ only stylistically and can be considered indistinguishable from the perspective of research synthesis.
=======
However, does a dividing fibroblast stop being a fibroblast, even if temporarily? Again, we do not aim to answer this in a philosophical-ontological sense. Pragmatically, if the explicit definition used for fibroblast (e.g., expression of a marker) still holds during duplication, this cell can be assigned to two  classes that are not hierarchically related: "fibroblasts" and "doubling cells". It is, thus, essential to consider that cells can belong to at least two disjunct classes.

If cells can be assigned to multiple classes that are not hierarchically related, it is not possible to annotate cell types using a single taxonomic tree, in which each concept would be represented by a single node with one (and only one) direct parent node. This is conflicting with attempts to classify cell-types using single hierarchies in the form of a tree [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz543] [@doi:10.7554/eLife.38619] [@doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100616-060818].  Cell types need to be represented ontologically (in the computational sense), which can be thought of multiple, intertwining trees, which take into account different ways of classifying cells. 




>>>>>>> master
