# Final remarks

<<<<<<< HEAD
In this article, we have proposed a set of three rules (explicit definition, taxon scope restriction, and theoretical usefulness) and one recommendation (hierarchical linking) to be followed when defining cell types.
We have also proposed four types of naming to clarify discussions on the topic: archetypes (a class with a scope above species level), _sensu stricto_ cell types (a class with scope equal to one species), infratypes (a class with scope below the species level) and technotypes (the exact cell type defined for an experimental setup).
The concept of the “technotype” can be harnessed as the unit for classifying cells, in a manner analogous to how the “species” is the conventional unit for classifying organisms into higher-order taxa. 
We have dissected some logical entailments of such definition, which admittedly might conflict with current views on defining cell types. 
We do not aim to solve such conflicts or negate the other perspectives but only to propose a unique way of organizing our knowledge on cell types. This article clarifies some of the meanings and provides directions for the future development of the theoretical basis of a cell type definition. 
The discussion on cell types’ definition is still in its infancy, and we need human power to tackle these huge theoretical challenges. 
Biologists, philosophers, and computer scientists ought to distill the details of defining cell types, powering the Human Cell Atlas, and the life sciences research enterprise of this century.
=======
In this article, we proposed a set of 3 rules (rigorous description, taxon scope restriction, and theoretical usefulness) and 1 recommendation (hierarchical link to other cell types) to define cell types. We also proposed 4 namings to clarify discussions on the topic: archetypes (a class with a scope above species level), _stricto sensu_ cell types (a class with scope equal to  one species), infratypes (a class with scope below the species level) and technotypes (the exact cell type defined for an experimental setup). The concept of the "technotype" can be harnessed as a fundamental taxonomic unit for classifying cells, in an analogous way of how the "species" is the conventional unit for classifying organisms into higher-order taxa. 

We dissected some logical entailments of such definition, which, admittedly,  might conflict with current views on defining cell types. We do not aim at solving such conflicts, or negating the other perspectives, but only propose a different way of organizing our knowledge about cell types. 

This article clarifies some of the meanings and provide directions to the future development of the theoretical basis of cell type definition. The discussion on cell types' definition is still on its infancy, and we need human power to tackle this huge theoretical challenges. Biologists, philosophers, and computer scientists ought to distill the details of defining cell types, powering the Human Cell Atlas, and the life sciences research enterprise of this century.  
>>>>>>> master
