# Supplementary notes

A set of notes that may be incorporated into the final text, or become appendices, or end up as blog posts somewhere. 

## What to do when two researchers disagree on a definition?

Cell type names are notoriously ambiguous and one definition might collide with an other, specially regarding the natural language name used to described. There are many different, equally valid definitions of a "dendritic cell." I do not aim to solve this problem from a societal standpoint. However, from a computational-ontology standpoint, there is one simple solution: split the concept. 

This approach is similar to King Solomon's solution in a famous bible story, called the [Judgement of Solomon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judgment_of_Solomon). In a dispute between two women that claimed to be the mothers of a child, the solution of the king was simple: split the baby. However, babies are notoriously indivisible, and the true mother did not really like the idea. 

It may be that some scientists are attached to their names, as mothers are to their babies. However, unlike babies, namings can be divided. Each of the scientists gets to name their specific conceptualization however they choose. Many names might "collide" in that way, and that is okay. Under the hood, however, the names refer to different identifiers. Computationally there would be no ambiguity. Then, it is just a matter of the researcher to respect the choice of their peers of calling something by the _wrong_ name, as long as the identifier is correct.


Splitting concepts upon conflicts in the end is more the multiplication of bread and fish in the [Feeding the multitude](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feeding_the_multitude) episode, and everyone gets to eat.


But ontologies are different from ordinary babies and magical fish. The splitting of concepts would not only create new concepts, but leave a trace. They would be immediate subclasses of their conjunction. An equally valid superclass that can be defined by "a cell containing characteristics of any of their subclasses".

In a parallel with text-book mitosis, the concept gets divided in two new, equally real concepts. And as we can trace cells in an animal to a single zygote, we can keep track of concepts while they keep dividing, whenever a new conflict pops up.   


## The big assumption of continuity in time

One assumption that underlies the validity of the models proposed here is that taxons preserve their characteristics throughout time. 

In Popper's Logic of Scientific Research, he states that he has a metaphysical faith on the continuity of laws of nature through time. 

We have no way of testing this metaphysical faith, and it is absolutely necessary for the scientific endeavour as we understand. 

While in physics this assumption seems to be reasonable, evolution makes biology quite more complicated. Statements that we have about the human species, for example, might be valid today, but were not valid 2000 years ago, and vice-versa. 

When I talk about sub-species taxons, which might be a local population of a town, for example, this unit is not immutable. The population of Newcastle, as per the example, might change in time, with imigration and emigration, mutation, natural selection, neutral evolution and the many forms of modifications of a gene pool. 

It is, thus, and heuristic, to call "population of Newcastle" a class. We could specify a period in time for which we expect the information to be valid. For example, we may say we are sampling from "the Newcastle population in the years 2019-2020." This would be a valid statement, but it would not be falsifiable, as by 1st of January 2021, no independent tests of the theory can be done. 

It is technically possible to have a technotype so precise as to have a scope with a time constraint. In fact, that might be the right way of representing information, if we want to compare experiments done in evolving populations.

While evolutionary definitions take this dimension into account, they are fit to theoretical research, but still lack the rigour for explaining real world experiments.

All research that uses human samples are subject to strong influence of time. I started this as a note, but it is so important that I'll have to add to the main text. 


## Clusters are not cells 

In the era of large-scale omics, we are starting to see declarations of cell types that are not based on pre-selected criteria, but derived from unsupervised clustering followed by labelling.

This is a powerful exploratory approach, which, as mentioned in the main text, has led to discoveries of ionocytes and new classes of dendritic cells, for example. 

Many algorithms and "expert-based" annotation protocols focus on labeling _clusters_ instead of labeling _cells_. 

Cells in a cluster are arbitrarily similar (as determined by the clustering algorithm) and so they will, by definition, differ from other cells in the sample.

For single-cell RNA-seq, one usually checks which genes are differentially expressed when comparing the cells in a cluster with cells in other clusters. These genes are called "markers" and used for labeling a cell cluster. 

What does it mean to label a cell cluster, though? Does it mean that _all_ cells there conform to the cell type? Does it mean that _most_ cells there conform to the cell type? Does it mean that cells from other clusters in the dataset _definitely do not_ conform to the cell type? 

So far, I haven't seem a clear, explicit, coherent definition for a cluster label. Not even once. 

Marker-based definitions are assumed for the group as a whole, but in current pipelines, nothing blocks one cell in a cluster to lack the expression of a "name-giver" marker. 

The classification scheme proposed here works to classify _cells_, but is not sufficient for labeling unsupervisedly-defined _cell clusters_. 

What is possible, though, is to use clustering for data exploration. From then on, strict patterns can be decided (ex: a cell that expresses A and B, but not C) and then apply this pattern to the whole dataset. For clusters with consistent markers, this approach should be roughly equivalent to the previously described. 

Using such "regular expressions" might lead to a cell being assigned to multiple clusters. Even if we assume that the sample is free of doublets, that cannot be a problem. Cells may have multiple functions. As argued in the main text, each cell can be labeled by multiple standards.

We may avoid multiple labeling if we really need in practice, though, and make preferential claims (if a  cell matches defintiions X and Y, it is assigned only to X, for example). 

By having explicit "regular expression" patterns for cell definitions in single-cell datasets, the "cell-type assesment" problem becomes trivial: a cell in  a new dataset is of the _exact_ same type if (and only if) it matches the _exact_ definition.

When that is not the case, current algorithms for reconciling single cell datasets can still be successfully employed. But instead of propagating a label, it would propagate a parent class, looking for cells of a similar, sister class. 


## What this work is not

This is not an attempt to substitute the Cell Ontology (CL) or contradict it in any way. CL is an amazing resource, built by a community of wonderful researchers. Its relation with CL is  coexistential, and topics discussed here might be or might not be of interest of CL, and that is OK. 

This is not an attempt to create an ontology itself, or a system that allows reasoning. It is a set of suggestions that can be taken into consideration for building a coherent ontology. The [Cell Type Wikibase](https://celltypes.wiki.opencura.com/) is an  experimental ontology, and far from ready to use. 

This is not an attempt to have a one-size-fits-all definition of cell type. It is built as a theoretical solution for one cell-type related task. Similar to  species definitions, we need an ecosystem of cell-type and cell state definitions that better suit different areas. 

This is not an attempt to claim anything about the "true" nature of cell types, in the biological sense. It is a proposal of pratical guidelines to represent research data.

This is not an attempt to solve _all_ problems for cell type data annotation. It is the introduction of alternatives that need to be further developed and discussed.

# Additional notes 

## Immune Epithope DB

The   Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource (IEDB)  announced it in 2006  [doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020125]: 

"the goal of the IEDB is to present as much information as possible without subjective interpretation, we can never presume any information, but rather we must try to capture the data exactly as presented in the reference, while maintaining the conclusions of the reference in a uniform manner. For example, if all experiments are performed with a whole cell population, but the authors attribute the response to a particular cell type without any evidence, we must capture the effector cells as the entire population."

That is the kind of challenge that the "technotype" solves in theory, as it gets the objective population sampled in any article. 

## Phenetic Species Concept

Species are the smallest groups that are consistently and persistently distinct and distinguishable by ordinary means (Cronquist 1978; DuRietz 1930; Sokal 1973; Doyen and Slobodchikoff 1974)

Maybe that is something crosslinkable.

